Computing

Computing  is any goal-oriented activity requiring, benefiting from, or creating  computing machinery . It includes the study and experimentation of  algorithmic  processes and development of both   hardware  and  software . It has scientific, engineering, mathematical, technological and social aspects. Major computing disciplines include  computer engineering ,  computer science ,  cybersecurity ,  data science ,  information systems ,  information technology  and  software engineering . [2] 
 The term  computing  is also  synonymous  with counting and calculating. In earlier times, it was used in reference to the action performed by  mechanical computing machines , and before that, to  human computers . [3] 
 Contents 
 1   History 
 2   Computer 
 
 2.1   Computer hardware 
 2.2   Computer software 
 
 2.2.1   System software 
 2.2.2   Application software 
 
 
 2.3   Computer network 
 
 2.3.1   Internet 
 
 
 2.4   Computer programming 
 
 2.4.1   Computer programmer 
 
 
 2.5   Computer industry 
 
 2.5.1   Software industry 
 
 
 
 
 3   Sub-disciplines of computing 
 
 3.1   Computer engineering 
 3.2   Software engineering 
 3.3   Computer science 
 3.4   Cybersecurity 
 3.5   Data science 
 3.6   Information systems 
 3.7   Information technology 
 
 
 4   Research and emerging technologies 
 
 4.1   Cloud computing 
 4.2   Quantum computing 
 
 
 5   See also 
 6   References 
 7   External links 
 History [ edit ] The history of computing is longer than the  history of computing hardware  and  modern computing technology  and includes the history of methods intended for pen and paper or for chalk and slate, with or without the aid of tables.
 Computing is intimately tied to the representation of  numbers . But long before  abstractions  like  the number  arose, there were mathematical concepts to serve the purposes of civilization. [ clarification needed ]  These concepts include  one-to-one correspondence  (the basis of counting), comparison to a standard (used for measurement), and the  3-4-5  right triangle (a device for assuring a  right angle ).
 The earliest known tool for use in computation was the  abacus , and it was thought to have been invented in  Babylon  circa 2400 BC. Its original style of usage was by lines drawn in sand with pebbles. Abaci, of a more modern design, are still used as calculation tools today. This was the first known calculation aid – preceding Greek methods by 2,000 years{{  computer |reason=What Greek methods?|date=March 2018}}.
 The first recorded idea of using digital electronics for computing was the 1931 paper "The Use of Thyratrons for High Speed Automatic Counting of Physical Phenomena" by  C. E. Wynn-Williams . [4]   Claude Shannon 's 1938 paper " A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits " then introduced the idea of using electronics for  Boolean algebraic  operations.
 The concept of a  field-effect transistor  was proposed by  Julius Edgar Lilienfeld  in 1925.  John Bardeen  and  Walter Brattain , while working under  William Shockley  at  Bell Labs , built the first working  transistor , the  point-contact transistor , in 1947. [5] [6]  In 1953, the  University of Manchester  built the first  transistorized computer , called the  Transistor Computer . [7]  However, early  junction transistors  were relatively bulky devices that were difficult to manufacture on a mass-production basis, which limited them to a number of specialised applications. [8]  The  metal–oxide–silicon field-effect transistor  (MOSFET, or MOS transistor) was invented by  Mohamed Atalla  and  Dawon Kahng  at Bell Labs in 1959. [9] [10]  It was the first truly compact transistor that could be  miniaturised  and  mass-produced  for a wide range of uses. [8]  The MOSFET made it possible to build  high-density   integrated circuit  chips, [11] [12]  leading to what is known as the  computer revolution [13]  or  microcomputer revolution . [14] 
 Computer [ edit ] A computer is a machine that manipulates  data  according to a set of instructions called a computer program. The program has an executable form that the computer can use directly to execute the instructions. The same program in its human-readable source code form, enables a programmer to study and develop a sequence of steps known as an algorithm. Because the instructions can be carried out in different types of computers, a single set of source instructions converts to machine instructions according to the CPU type.
 The execution  process  carries out the instructions in a computer program. Instructions express the computations performed by the computer. They trigger sequences of simple actions on the executing machine. Those actions produce effects according to the  semantics  of the instructions.
 Computer hardware [ edit ] Computer hardware includes the physical parts of a computer, including  central processing unit ,  memory  and  input/output . Important topics in the field of computer hardware are  computational logic  and  computer architecture .
 Computer software [ edit ] Computer software, or just "software", is a collection of computer programs and related  data  that provides the instructions for telling a  computer  what to do and how to do it. Software refers to one or more computer programs and data held in the storage of the computer for some purposes. In other words, software is a set of  programs, procedures, algorithms  and its  documentation  concerned with the operation of a data processing system. Program software performs the  function  of the  program  it implements, either by directly providing  instructions  to the computer hardware or by serving as input to another piece of software. The  term  was coined to contrast with the old term  hardware  (meaning physical devices). In contrast to hardware, software is intangible. [15]  Software is also sometimes used in a more narrow sense, meaning application software only.
 System software [ edit ] System software, or systems software, is computer software designed to operate and control the computer hardware, and to provide a platform for running application software. System software includes  operating systems ,  utility software ,  device drivers ,  window systems , and  firmware . Frequently used development tools such as  compilers ,  linkers , and  debuggers [16]  are classified as system software.
 Application software [ edit ] Application software, also known as an "application" or an "app", is  computer software  designed to help the user to perform specific tasks. Examples include  enterprise software ,  accounting software ,  office suites ,  graphics software  and  media players . Many application programs deal principally with  documents . Apps may be  bundled  with the computer and its system software, or may be published separately. Some users are satisfied with the bundled apps and need never install additional applications. Application software is contrasted with  system software  and  middleware , which manage and integrate a computer's capabilities, but typically do not directly apply them in the performance of tasks that benefit the user. The system software serves the application, which in turn serves the user. Application software applies the power of a particular  computing platform  or system software to a particular purpose. Some apps such as  Microsoft Office  are available in versions for several different platforms; others have narrower requirements and are thus called, for example, a  Geography  application for  Windows  or an  Android  application for  education  or  Linux gaming . Sometimes a new and popular application arises that only runs on one platform, increasing the desirability of that platform. This is called a  killer application .
 Computer network [ edit ] A computer network, often simply referred to as a network, is a collection of hardware components and computers  interconnected  by communication channels that allow sharing of resources and information. [17]  Where at least one process in one device is able to send/receive data to/from at least one process residing in a remote device, then the two devices are said to be in a network.
 Networks may be classified according to a wide variety of characteristics such as the medium used to transport the data,  communications protocol  used, scale,  topology , and organizational scope.
 Communications protocols  define the rules and data formats for exchanging information in a computer network, and provide the basis for  network programming . Well-known communications protocols include  Ethernet , a hardware and  link layer  standard that is ubiquitous in  local area networks , and the  Internet Protocol Suite , which defines a set of protocols for internetworking, i.e. for data communication between multiple networks, as well as host-to-host data transfer, and application-specific data transmission formats.
 Computer networking is sometimes considered a sub-discipline of  electrical engineering ,  telecommunications ,  computer science ,  information technology  or  computer engineering , since it relies upon the theoretical and practical application of these disciplines.
 Internet [ edit ] The Internet is a global system of interconnected  computer networks  that use the standard  Internet Protocol Suite  (TCP/IP) to serve billions of users that consists of millions of private, public, academic, business, and government networks, of local to global scope, that are linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless and optical networking technologies. The Internet carries an extensive range of  information  resources and services, such as the inter-linked  hypertext  documents of the  World Wide Web  and the  infrastructure  to support  email .
 Computer programming [ edit ] Computer programming in general is the process of writing, testing, debugging, and maintaining the source code and documentation of  computer programs . This source code is written in a  programming language , which is an  artificial language  often more restrictive or demanding than  natural languages , but easily translated by the computer. The purpose of programming is to invoke the desired behavior (customization) from the machine. The process of writing high quality source code requires knowledge of both the application's domain   and  the computer science domain. The highest-quality software is thus developed by a team of various domain experts, each person a specialist in some area of development. But the term  programmer  may apply to a range of program quality, from  hacker  to  open source contributor  to professional. And a single programmer could do most or all of the computer programming needed to generate the  proof of concept  to launch a new  "killer" application .
 Computer programmer [ edit ] A programmer, computer programmer, or coder is a person who writes  computer software . The term  computer programmer  can refer to a specialist in one area of  computer programming  or to a generalist who writes code for many kinds of software. One who practices or professes a formal approach to programming may also be known as a programmer analyst. A programmer's primary computer language ( C ,  C++ ,  Java ,  Lisp ,  Python , etc.) is often prefixed to the above titles, and those who work in a web environment often prefix their titles with  web . The term  programmer  can be used to refer to a  software developer ,  software engineer ,  computer scientist , or  software analyst . However, members of these  professions  typically [18]  possess other  software engineering  skills, beyond programming.
 Computer industry [ edit ] The computer industry is made up of all of the businesses involved in developing  computer software , designing  computer hardware  and  computer networking  infrastructures, the manufacture of  computer  components and the provision of  information technology  services including  system administration  and maintenance.
 Software industry [ edit ] The software industry includes businesses engaged in  development ,  maintenance  and  publication  of  software . The industry also includes software  services , such as  training ,  documentation , and  consulting .
 Sub-disciplines of computing [ edit ] Computer engineering [ edit ] Computer engineering is a  discipline  that integrates several fields of  electrical engineering  and  computer science  required to develop computer hardware and software. [19]  Computer engineers usually have training in  electronic engineering  (or  electrical engineering ),  software design , and hardware-software integration instead of only software engineering or electronic engineering. Computer engineers are involved in many hardware and software aspects of computing, from the design of individual  microprocessors ,  personal computers , and  supercomputers , to  circuit design . This field of engineering not only focuses on the design of hardware within its own domain, but as well the interactions between hardware and the world around it. [20] 
 Software engineering [ edit ] Software engineering (SE) is the application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the design, development, operation, and maintenance of  software , and the study of these approaches; that is, the application of  engineering  to software. [21] [22] [23]  In layman's terms, it is the act of using insights to conceive, model and scale a solution to a problem. The first reference to the term is the 1968  NATO Software Engineering Conference  and was meant to provoke thought regarding the perceived " software crisis " at the time. [24] [25] [26]   Software development , a much used and more generic term, does not necessarily subsume the engineering paradigm. The generally accepted concepts of Software Engineering as an engineering discipline have been specified in the Guide to the  Software Engineering Body of Knowledge  (SWEBOK). The SWEBOK has become an internationally accepted standard ISO/IEC TR 19759:2015. [27] 
 Computer science [ edit ] Computer science or computing science (abbreviated CS or Comp Sci) is the  scientific  and practical approach to  computation  and its applications. A  computer scientist  specializes in the theory of computation and the design of computational systems. [28] 
 Its subfields can be divided into practical techniques for its implementation and application in  computer systems  and purely theoretical areas. Some, such as  computational complexity theory , which studies fundamental properties of  computational problems , are highly abstract, while others, such as  computer graphics , emphasize real-world applications. Still others focus on the challenges in implementing computations. For example,  programming language theory  studies approaches to description of computations, while the study of  computer programming  itself investigates various aspects of the use of  programming languages  and  complex systems , and  human–computer interaction  focuses on the challenges in making computers and computations useful, usable, and universally accessible to  humans .
 Cybersecurity [ edit ] Data science [ edit ] Information systems [ edit ] "Information systems (IS)" is the study of complementary networks of hardware and software (see  information technology ) that people and organizations use to collect, filter, process, create, and distribute  data . [29] [30] [31] [32] [33]  The  ACM 's  Computing Careers  website says 
 "A majority of IS [degree] programs are located in business schools; however, they may have different names such as management information systems, computer information systems, or business information systems. All IS degrees combine business and computing topics, but the emphasis between technical and organizational issues varies among programs. For example, programs differ substantially in the amount of programming required." [34] 
 The study bridges  business  and  computer science  using the theoretical foundations of  information  and  computation  to study various business models and related  algorithmic  processes within a computer science discipline. [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] 
 The field of Computer Information System(s) (CIS) studies computers and algorithmic processes, including their principles, their software and hardware designs, their applications, and their impact on society [45] [46] [47]  while IS emphasizes functionality over design. [48] 
 Information technology [ edit ] Information technology (IT) is the application of  computers  and  telecommunications equipment  to store, retrieve, transmit and manipulate data, [49]  often in the context of a business or other enterprise. [50]  The term is commonly used as a synonym for computers and computer networks, but it also encompasses other information distribution technologies such as television and telephones. Several  industries  are associated with information technology, such as  computer hardware ,  software ,  electronics ,  semiconductors ,  internet ,  telecom equipment ,  e-commerce  and  computer services . [51] [52] 
 Research and emerging technologies [ edit ] DNA-based computing  and  quantum computing  are areas of active research in both hardware and software (such as the development of  quantum algorithms ). Potential infrastructure for future technologies includes  DNA origami  on photolithography [53]  and  quantum antennae  for transferring information between ion traps. [54]  By 2011, researchers had  entangled  14  qubits . [55] [56]  Fast  digital circuits  (including those based on  Josephson junctions  and  rapid single flux quantum  technology) are becoming more nearly realizable with the discovery of  nanoscale superconductors . [57] 
 Fiber-optic and photonic (optical) devices, which already have been used to transport data over long distances, have started being used by data centers, side by side with CPU and semiconductor memory components. This allows the separation of RAM from CPU by optical interconnects. [58]  IBM has created an  integrated circuit  with both electronic and optical information processing in one chip. This is denoted "CMOS-integrated nanophotonics" or (CINP). [59]  One benefit of optical interconnects is that motherboards which formerly required a certain kind of system on a chip (SoC) can now move formerly dedicated memory and network controllers off the motherboards, spreading the controllers out onto the rack. This allows standardization of backplane interconnects and motherboards for multiple types of SoCs, which allows more timely upgrades of CPUs. [60] 
 Another field of research is  spintronics . Spintronics can provide computing power and storage, without heat buildup. [61]  Some research is being done on hybrid chips, which combine  photonics  and spintronics. [62] [63]  There is also research ongoing on combining  plasmonics , photonics, and electronics. [64] 
 Cloud computing [ edit ] Cloud computing is a model that allows for the use of computing resources, such as servers or applications, without the need for much interaction between the owner of these resources and the user using them. It is typically offered as a service, making it another example of  Software as a Service ,  Platforms as a Service , and  Infrastructure as a Service  depending on the functionality offered. Key characteristics include on-demand access, broad network access, and the capability of rapid scaling. [65]  It allows individual users or small business to benefit from  economies of scale .
 One area of interest in this field is its potential to support energy efficiency. Allowing thousands of instances of computation to occur on one single machine instead of thousands of individual machines could help save energy. It could also ease the transition to more renewable energy, since it would suffice to power one server farm with a set of solar panels or wind turbines rather than millions of peoples' homes. [66]  
 With centralized computing, the field poses several challenges, especially in security and privacy. Current legislation does not sufficiently protect users from companies mishandling their data on the company servers. This suggests potential for further legislative regulations on cloud computing and tech companies. [67] 
 Quantum computing [ edit ] Quantum computing  is an area of research that brings together the disciplines of computer science, information theory, and quantum physics. The idea of information being a basic part of physics is relatively new, but there seems to be a strong tie between information theory and quantum mechanics. [68]  Whereas traditional computing operates on a binary system of ones and zeros, quantum computing uses  qubits . Qubits are capable of being in a superposition, which means that they are in both states, one and zero, simultaneously. This means the qubit is not somewhere between 1 and 0, but actually the value of the qubit will change depending on when you measure it. This trait of qubits is called  quantum entanglement  and is the core idea of quantum computing and is what allows quantum computers to do the large scale equations they are used for. [69]  Quantum computing is often used for scientific research where a normal computer does not have nearly enough computational power to do the calculations necessary. A good example would be  molecular modeling . Large molecules are far too complex for modern computers to calculate what happens to them during a reaction, but the power of quantum computers could open the doors to further understanding these molecules.
 See also [ edit ] Computational thinking 
 Creative computing 
 Electronic data processing 
 Index of history of computing articles 
 Lehmer sieve 
 List of computer term etymologies 
 Scientific computing 
 Enthusiast computing References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] Definitions  from Wiktionary Media  from Commons Textbooks  from Wikibooks Resources  from Wikiversity FOLDOC: the Free On-Line Dictionary Of Computing 
 v t e Printed circuit board 
 Peripheral 
 Integrated circuit 
 Very Large Scale Integration 
 Systems on Chip (SoCs) 
 Energy consumption (Green computing) 
 Electronic design automation 
 Hardware acceleration Computer architecture 
 Embedded system 
 Real-time computing 
 Dependability Network architecture 
 Network protocol 
 Network components 
 Network scheduler 
 Network performance evaluation 
 Network service Interpreter 
 Middleware 
 Virtual machine 
 Operating system 
 Software quality Programming paradigm 
 Programming language 
 Compiler 
 Domain-specific language 
 Modeling language 
 Software framework 
 Integrated development environment 
 Software configuration management 
 Software library 
 Software repository Control variable 
 Software development process 
 Requirements analysis 
 Software design 
 Software construction 
 Software deployment 
 Software maintenance 
 Programming team 
 Open-source model Model of computation 
 Formal language 
 Automata theory 
 Computability theory 
 Computational complexity theory 
 Logic 
 Semantics Algorithm design 
 Analysis of algorithms 
 Algorithmic efficiency 
 Randomized algorithm 
 Computational geometry Discrete mathematics 
 Probability 
 Statistics 
 Mathematical software 
 Information theory 
 Mathematical analysis 
 Numerical analysis 
 Theoretical computer science Database management system 
 Information storage systems 
 Enterprise information system 
 Social information systems 
 Geographic information system 
 Decision support system 
 Process control system 
 Multimedia information system 
 Data mining 
 Digital library 
 Computing platform 
 Digital marketing 
 World Wide Web 
 Information retrieval Cryptography 
 Formal methods 
 Security services 
 Intrusion detection system 
 Hardware security 
 Network security 
 Information security 
 Application security Interaction design 
 Social computing 
 Ubiquitous computing 
 Visualization 
 Accessibility Concurrent computing 
 Parallel computing 
 Distributed computing 
 Multithreading 
 Multiprocessing Natural language processing 
 Knowledge representation and reasoning 
 Computer vision 
 Automated planning and scheduling 
 Search methodology 
 Control method 
 Philosophy of artificial intelligence 
 Distributed artificial intelligence Supervised learning 
 Unsupervised learning 
 Reinforcement learning 
 Multi-task learning 
 Cross-validation Animation 
 Rendering 
 Image manipulation 
 Graphics processing unit 
 Mixed reality 
 Virtual reality 
 Image compression 
 Solid modeling E-commerce 
 Enterprise software 
 Computational mathematics 
 Computational physics 
 Computational chemistry 
 Computational biology 
 Computational social science 
 Computational engineering 
 Computational healthcare 
 Digital art 
 Electronic publishing 
 Cyberwarfare 
 Electronic voting 
 Video games 
 Word processing 
 Operations research 
 Educational technology 
 Document management   Category 
   Outline 
 WikiProject 
   Commons Computing All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 errors: deprecated parameters Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2019 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Navigation menu Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Article Talk Read Edit View history 
				 Search 
			 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Download as PDF Printable version Wikimedia Commons Wikinews العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Basa Banyumasan Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nāhuatl Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Novial Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча Polski Русский Scots සිංහල Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 
	  This page was last edited on 5 March 2022, at 19:55  (UTC) . 
	 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
	 Privacy policy 
	 About Wikipedia 
	 Disclaimers 
	 Contact Wikipedia 
	 Mobile view 
	 Developers 
	 Statistics 
	 Cookie statement 
 
	 
	 
