Source code


 Code 
 Translation 
 Compiler 
 Compile-time 
 Optimizing compiler 
 Intermediate representation  (IR) 
 Execution 
 Runtime system 
 Runtime 
 Executable 
 Interpreter 
 Virtual machine Source code 
 Object code 
 Bytecode 
 Machine code 
 Microcode Just-in-time  (JIT)
 Tracing just-in-time 
 Ahead-of-time  (AOT) 
 Transcompilation 
 Recompilation Android Runtime  (ART) 
 Common Language Runtime  (CLR) and  Mono 
 crt0 
 Java virtual machine  (JVM) 
 Objective-C  and  Swift 
 V8  and  Node.js 
 CPython  and  PyPy 
 Zend Engine  (PHP) GNU Compiler Collection  (GCC) 
 LLVM  and  Clang v t e In  computing ,  source code  is any collection of code, with or without  comments , written using a  human-readable   programming language , usually as  plain text . The source code of a  program  is specially designed to facilitate the work of computer  programmers , who specify the actions to be performed by a computer mostly by writing source code. The source code is often transformed by an  assembler  or  compiler  into  binary   machine code  that can be executed by the computer. The machine code might then be stored for  execution  at a later time. Alternatively, source code may be  interpreted  and thus immediately executed.
 Most  application software  is distributed in a form that includes only  executable  files. If the source code were included it would be useful to a  user , programmer, or a  system administrator , any of whom might wish to study or modify the program.
 Contents 
 1   Definitions 
 2   History 
 3   Organization 
 4   Purposes 
 5   Legal aspects 
 
 5.1   Licensing 
 
 
 6   Quality 
 7   See also 
 8   References 
 
 8.1   Sources 
 
 
 9   External links 
 Definitions [ edit ] The  Linux  Information Project defines source code as: [2] 
 Source code (also referred to as source or code) is the version of software as it is originally written (i.e., typed into a computer) by a human in  plain text  (i.e., human readable alphanumeric characters).
 The notion of source code may also be taken more broadly, to include machine code and notations in graphical languages, neither of which are textual in nature. An example from an article presented on the annual IEEE conference and on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation: [3] 
 For the purpose of clarity "source code" is taken to mean any fully executable description of a software system. It is therefore so construed as to include machine code, very high level languages and executable graphical representations of systems. [4] Often there are several steps of  program translation  or  minification  between the original source code typed by a human and an executable program. While some, like the  FSF , argue that an intermediate file "is not real source code and does not count as source code", [5]  others find it convenient to refer to each intermediate file as the source code for the next steps.
 History [ edit ] The earliest programs for  stored-program computers  were entered in binary through the  front panel  switches of the computer. This  first-generation programming language  had no distinction between source code and  machine code .
 When IBM first offered software to work with its machine, the source code was provided at no additional charge. At that time, the cost of developing and supporting software was included in the price of the hardware. For decades, IBM distributed source code with its software product licenses, until 1983. [6] 
 Most early computer magazines published source code as  type-in programs .
 Occasionally the entire source code to a large program is published as a hardback book, such as  Computers and Typesetting , vol. B:  TeX, The Program  by  Donald Knuth ,  PGP Source Code and Internals  by  Philip Zimmermann ,  PC SpeedScript  by  Randy Thompson , and  µC/OS, The Real-Time Kernel  by Jean Labrosse.
 Organization [ edit ] The source code which constitutes a  program  is usually held in one or more  text files  stored on a computer's  hard disk ; usually, these files are carefully arranged into a  directory tree , known as a  source tree . Source code can also be stored in a database (as is common for  stored procedures ) or elsewhere.
 The source code for a particular piece of software may be contained in a single file or many files. Though the practice is uncommon, a program's source code can be written in different programming languages. [7]  For example, a program written primarily in the  C programming language , might have portions written in  assembly language  for optimization purposes. It is also possible for some components of a piece of software to be written and compiled separately, in an arbitrary programming language, and later integrated into the software using a technique called  library linking . In some languages, such as  Java , this can be done at  run time  (each class is compiled into a separate file that is linked by the interpreter at runtime).
 Yet another method is to make the main program an interpreter for a programming language, [ citation needed ]  either designed specifically for the application in question or general-purpose and then write the bulk of the actual user functionality as  macros  or other forms of add-ins in this language, an approach taken for example by the  GNU Emacs  text editor.
 The  code base  of a  computer programming  project is the larger collection of all the source code of all the  computer programs  which make up the project. It has become common practice to maintain code bases in  version control systems . Moderately complex software customarily requires the compilation or assembly of several, sometimes dozens or maybe even hundreds, of different source code files. In these cases, instructions for compilations, such as a  Makefile , are included with the source code. These describe the programming relationships among the source code files and contain information about how they are to be compiled.
 Purposes [ edit ] Source code is primarily used as input to the process that produces an executable program (i.e., it is  compiled  or  interpreted ). It is also used as a method of communicating  algorithms  between people (e.g.,  code snippets  in books). [8] 
 Computer programmers  often find it helpful to review existing source code to learn about programming techniques. [8]  The sharing of source code between developers is frequently cited as a contributing factor to the maturation of their programming skills. [8]  Some people consider source code an expressive  artistic medium . [9] 
 Porting  software to other  computer platforms  is usually prohibitively difficult without source code. Without the source code for a particular piece of software, portability is generally computationally expensive. [ citation needed ]  Possible porting options include  binary translation  and emulation of the original platform.
 Decompilation  of an executable program can be used to generate source code, either in  assembly code  or in a  high-level language .
 Programmers frequently adapt source code from one piece of software to use in other projects, a concept known as  software reusability .
 Legal aspects [ edit ] The situation varies worldwide, but in the United States before 1974, software and its source code was not  copyrightable  and therefore always  public domain software . [10] 
 In 1974, the US Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted Works (CONTU) decided that "computer programs, to the extent that they embody an author's original creation, are proper subject matter of copyright". [11] [12] 
 In 1983 in the United States court case  Apple v. Franklin  it was ruled that the same applied to  object code ; and that the Copyright Act gave computer programs the copyright status of literary works.
 In 1999, in the United States court case  Bernstein v. United States  it was further ruled that source code could be considered a constitutionally protected form of  free speech . Proponents of free speech argued that because source code conveys information to programmers, is written in a language, and can be used to share humor and other artistic pursuits, it is a protected form of communication. [13] [14] [15] 
 Licensing [ edit ] Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
 Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at
 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
 An author of a  non-trivial work  like software, [12]  has several  exclusive rights , among them the copyright for the source code and  object code . [17]  The author has the right and possibility to grant customers and users of his software some of his exclusive rights in form of  software licensing . Software, and its accompanying source code, can be associated with several licensing paradigms; the most important distinction is  free software  vs  proprietary software . This is done by including a  copyright notice  that declares licensing terms. If no notice is found, then the default of  All rights reserved  is implied.
 Generally speaking, a software is free software if its users are free to use it for any purpose, study and change its source code, give or sell its exact copies, and give or sell its modified copies. Software is  proprietary  if it is distributed while the source code is kept secret, or is privately owned and restricted. One of the first software licenses to be published and to explicitly grant these freedoms was the  GNU General Public License  in 1989; the  BSD license  is another early example from 1990.
 For proprietary software, the provisions of the various copyright laws,  trade secrecy  and  patents  are used to keep the source code closed. Additionally, many pieces of  retail software  come with an  end-user license agreement  (EULA) which typically prohibits  decompilation ,  reverse engineering , analysis, modification, or circumventing of  copy protection . Types of source code protection—beyond traditional  compilation  to  object code —include code encryption,  code obfuscation  or  code morphing .
 Quality [ edit ] The way a program is written can have important consequences for its maintainers.  Coding conventions , which stress  readability  and some language-specific conventions, are aimed at the maintenance of the software source code, which involves  debugging  and  updating . Other priorities, such as the speed of the program's execution, or the ability to compile the program for multiple architectures, often make code readability a less important consideration, since code  quality  generally depends on its  purpose .
 See also [ edit ] Bytecode 
 Code as data 
 Coding conventions 
 Computer code 
 Free software 
 Legacy code 
 Machine code 
 Markup language 
 Obfuscated code 
 Object code 
 Open-source software 
 Package (package management system) 
 Programming language 
 Source code repository 
 Syntax highlighting 
 Visual programming language References [ edit ] Sources [ edit ] (VEW04) "Using a Decompiler for Real-World Source Recovery", M. Van Emmerik and T. Waddington, the  Working Conference on Reverse Engineering ,  Delft ,  Netherlands , 9–12 November 2004.  Extended version of the paper . External links [ edit ] Source Code Definition  by The Linux Information Project (LINFO) 
 "Obligatory accreditation system for IT security products" . MetaFilter.com. 22 September 2008.  will introduce rules requiring foreign firms to disclose secret information about digital household appliances and other products from May next year, the  Yomiuri Shimbun  said, citing unnamed sources. If a company refuses to disclose information, China would ban it from exporting the product to the Chinese market or producing or selling it in China, the paper said. 
 Same program written in multiple languages France   (data) 
 Germany 
 Israel 
 United States Faceted Application of Subject Terminology 
 SUDOC (France) 
 1 Source code Text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2010 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from January 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Navigation menu Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Article Talk Read Edit View history 
				 Search 
			 Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item Download as PDF Printable version Wikimedia Commons Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bân-lâm-gú Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Кыргызча Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий Pälzisch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 
	  This page was last edited on 7 March 2022, at 02:47  (UTC) . 
	 Text is available under the  Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the  Terms of Use  and  Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the  Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization. 
 
	 Privacy policy 
	 About Wikipedia 
	 Disclaimers 
	 Contact Wikipedia 
	 Mobile view 
	 Developers 
	 Statistics 
	 Cookie statement 
 
	 
	 
